Fulfillment docs (#1520)
saleor/saleor-docs: docs/developer/order/order-fulfillment.mdx

---
title: Order Fulfillment
---
## Introduction

Order fulfillment is the process of handling and delivering goods to customers. 
In Saleor, fulfillments represent the shipping and logistics stage of an order.

> #### When are fulfillments created?

Reviewer: **suggestion (blocking)**:
Headings should increase one level at a time to keep the structure clear, like:
```
#
##
###
####
#####
######
```

```suggestion
### When are fulfillments created?
```

- Automatically after checkout completion (if [`channel.orderSettings.automaticallyConfirmAllNewOrders`](api-reference/miscellaneous/objects/order-settings.mdx#ordersettingsautomaticallyconfirmallnewordersboolean---) is enabled)
- Manually through the [`orderConfirm`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-confirm) mutation

For more details about order statuses and their transitions, see the [Order Status lifecycle](order-status.mdx).

#### Order-Fulfillment Relationship

An order can have multiple fulfillments, each linked to specific order lines and warehouses. This one-to-many relationship allows for:
- Shipping items from multiple locations
- Partially fulfilling orders (e.g., when some items are damaged in stock)
- Handling split shipments for different delivery dates
- Managing returns and replacements independently

Each fulfillment affects the order's status:
- Creating a fulfillment moves the order to `PARTIALLY_FULFILLED` or `FULFILLED` status
- Canceling all fulfillments returns the order to `UNFULFILLED` status
- Returning items can move the order to `PARTIALLY_RETURNED` or `RETURNED` status

## Fulfillment Lifecycle

> Possible [`Fulfillment statuses`](/api-reference/orders/enums/fulfillment-status)

Reviewer: **style (non-blocking)**:

```suggestion
[`FulfillmentStatus Enum`](/api-reference/orders/enums/fulfillment-status) represents all the possible states fulfillment can be in.
```

When set to false, fulfillments will remain in WAITING_FOR_APPROVAL until approved by an authorized entity.

### Status Transitions
**If fulfillment is in WAITING_FOR_APPROVAL**:
   - Running [`orderFulfillmentApprove`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-approve) changes status to **FULFILLED**.
   - Running [`orderFulfillmentCancel`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-cancel) **removes the fulfillment**.

**If fulfillment is in FULFILLED**:
   - Running [`orderFulfillmentCancel`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-cancel) changes status to **CANCELED**.
   - Running [`orderFulfillmentReturnProducts`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-return-products) changes status based on the request:
     - **RETURNED** → If only a return was requested.
     - **REPLACED** → If a replacement was requested.
   - Running [`orderFulfillmentRefundProducts`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-refund-products) changes status based on the request:
     - **REFUNDED** → If only a refund was requested.
     - **REFUNDED_AND_RETURNED** → If both return and refund were requested.

### Order Line Fulfillment Status

> Each order line maintains its own fulfillment status through two key fields:

Reviewer: **suggestion (blocking):** 
I would rephrase it to avoid using the word "status" again, since it means a different thing in the sections above. Maybe "state"?

            "quantityFulfilled": 2,
            "quantityToFulfill": 0
          },
          {
            "id": "T3JkZXJMaW5lOjhjZjY5ZGEzLWFkNWItNGM0NS1iOGE0LTQ2YWZmN2JmOGQ1Mw==",
            "quantityFulfilled": 3,
            "quantityToFulfill": 0
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

:::note
- Approving a fulfillment will trigger the `FULFILLMENT_APPROVED` webhook event
- The order status will change to `FULFILLED` if all items are fulfilled
- Fulfillment approval can be enabled/disabled using the `shop.fulfillmentAutoApprove` setting in shop settings
:::

### Update Tracking Number

The [`orderFulfillmentUpdateTracking`](/api-reference/orders/mutations/order-fulfillment-update-tracking) mutation allows you to update or add a tracking number to an existing fulfillment. This is useful when:
- The tracking number becomes available after the initial fulfillment creation
- You need to update an incorrect tracking number
- You're using a shipping provider that assigns tracking numbers after shipment

**Required Fields** 

- `id` - The unique identifier of the fulfillment to update
- `trackingNumber` - The new tracking number to set

**Optional Fields**

> - `notifyCustomer` - When enabled, sends an email notification to the customer with the updated tracking information

Author: I removed email and add info that `notification about the <XYZ> is triggered via the configured plugins or apps.` https://github.com/saleor/saleor-docs/pull/1520/commits/87aca803479b6f088d5491107124e4cf0641d822

  - When enabled, fulfillments are automatically approved
  - When disabled, fulfillments remain in `WAITING_FOR_APPROVAL` status until approved

[`Shop.fulfillmentAllowUnpaid`](/api-reference/miscellaneous/objects/shop#shopfulfillmentallowunpaidboolean---)
  - When enabled, allows creating fulfillments for unpaid orders
  - Useful for certain business models or special cases
  - Should be used with caution as it bypasses payment verification

### Channel Settings
[`OrderSettings.automaticallyFulfillNonShippableGiftCard`](/api-reference/miscellaneous/objects/order-settings#ordersettingsautomaticallyfulfillnonshippablegiftcardboolean---)
  - When enabled, gift card orders are automatically fulfilled
  - Default value is `true`
  - Applies only to non-shippable gift cards
  - Useful for instant delivery of digital gift cards

:::note
- These settings can be configured through the GraphQL API, some of them through the Saleor Dashboard
- Some settings may require specific permissions to modify
- Changes to these settings can affect the entire fulfillment workflow
:::

## Edge Cases & Exceptions

Some settings in Saleor can interact in unexpected ways depending on your implementation. 

> To help avoid confusion, here are some common edge cases to be aware of:

Reviewer: **suggestion (blocking)**:
I think calling them "unexpected" might be confusing; they’re just how Saleor works. It might be clearer to focus on explaining the edge cases rather than addressing the potential confusion.

### Gift Card Fulfillment with Payment Settings

> The interaction between [`automaticallyFulfillNonShippableGiftCard`](/api-reference/miscellaneous/objects/order-settings#ordersettingsautomaticallyfulfillnonshippablegiftcardboolean---) and [`fulfillmentAllowUnpaid`](/api-reference/miscellaneous/objects/shop#shopfulfillmentallowunpaidboolean---)

Reviewer: **suggestion (blocking)**:

This sentence feels incomplete. Could we rephrase it to something like: "The following explains the interaction between... when..."
